SCA Literature Overview (#262)
sehlen-bsi/botan-docs: docs/audit_report/src/side_channels/02_00_literature.rst

the value of $e$ into RAM, or during matrix-vector multiplications of $e$.
Hence, all bits of secret data should be processed uniformly, regardless of
their value.

ML-KEM
------

ML-KEM (formerly Kyber) is a key-encapsulation mechanism (KEM) based on the
learning with errors problem in module lattices (MLWE problem). ML-KEM is
designed to be resistant against timing-based and cache-based side-channel
attacks [ABD20b]_. For this, neither the reference implementations nor the
optimized implementations use branching depending on the secret key or table
lookups at source code level.

Nonetheless, Bernstein et al. [BBB24]_ discovered multiple timing
vulnerabilities (called KyberSlash1 and KyberSlash2) that are introduced by
compilers during code optimization. Compilers often optimize division operations
by transforming them into much faster multiplication operations. The KyberSlash
attacks use the fact that the division by the ML-KEM-constant KYBER_Q uses the
C-language division operator. This division is compiled into an instruction that
is not constant-time and is used to recover the secret key. This attack is

> mitigated in Botan version 3.3 and is done by manually changing the critical

Reviewer: ```suggestion
addressed in Botan version 3.3 by manually changing the critical
```

division into multiple, smaller operations that are constant-time. The new set
of operations is constructed so that a compiler will not create code with
variable execution time.

An overview of side-channel attacks on ML-DSA and ML-KEM based on power and
electromagnetic radiation can be found in [RCD24]_.

FrodoKEM
--------

FrodoKEM [ABD20a]_ is a key encapsulation mechanism (KEM) whose security is
based on the learning with errors problem (LWE). Unlike ML-KEM and ML-DSA, the
underlying LWE problem of FrodoKEM is based on generic, algebraically
unstructured lattices. The structured variants of the LWE problem are more

> compact and computationally efficient, but can also lead to additional attacks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compact and computationally efficient, but may also lead to additional attacks
```

Literature Overview of Side-Channel Analysis for the Implemented PQC-Schemes
============================================================================

Introduction
------------

This chapter contains a short literature review for side-channel analysis for post-quantum cryptography (PQC) algorithms that will be implemented in the cryptolibray Botan.
Since the implementations and their scope in the P481 project are only software-based, we will focus the literature review mainly on timing and cache side-channel attacks (SCAs).

Classic McEliece
----------------

Classic McEliece is a code-based key encapsulation mechanism (KEM) submitted to the NIST PQC competition.
The hardness relies on the ability to decode a binary Goppa code, a type of error-correcting code.
A public key consists of a random binary Goppa code and a ciphertext is a codeword xor-ed with some random error $e$.
Code-based cryptosystems were introduced by Robert J. McEliece in 1978 [McE78].

> Against unprotected implementations of McEliece, there are multiple timing-based side-channel attacks.

Reviewer: I believe these are against McEliece not Classic McEliece

> Against unprotected implementations of McEliece, there are multiple timing-based side-channel attacks.

Author: Fair :+1:

See, for example, the attacks in [AHP+11;BCD+16;COT17;STM+08;Str10], targeting different parts of the scheme.

The implementations of Classic McEliece to the NIST PQC competition are designed "to avoid all data flow from secrets to timing" [ABC+22] and mitigate the attacks listed above.
The Classic McEliece specification [ABC+22] contains guidelines for secure implementations of the scheme.

> Especially encapsulation and decapsulation are prone to timing leakage.

Author: ```suggestion
Encapsulation and decapsulation are especially prone to timing leakage.
```

> Especially encapsulation and decapsulation are prone to timing leakage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Especially encapsulation and decapsulation are prone to timing leakage. The side channel analysis of [BCM+23] regarding Classic McEliece only considers a physical attack surface.
```

One has to be careful when handling the error vector $e$, either when writing the value of $e$ into RAM, or during matrix-vector multiplications of $e$.
Hence, all bits of secret data should be processed uniformly, regardless of their value.

Kyber (ML-KEM)
--------------

Kyber is a key-encapsulation mechanism (KEM) based on the learning with errors problem in module lattices (MLWE problem).
Kyber is designed to be resistant against timing-based and cache-based side-channel attacks [ABD+20b]
For this, neither the reference implementations nor the optimized implementations use branching depending on the secret key or table lookups at source code level.

> Nonetheless, Bernstein et al. [BBB] discovered multiple timing vulnerabilities (called KyberSlash1 and KyberSlash2), that are introduced by compilers during code optimization.
> Compilers often optimize division operations by transforming them into much faster multiplication operations.

Author: ```suggestion
Nonetheless, Bernstein et al. [BBB] discovered multiple timing vulnerabilities (called KyberSlash1 and KyberSlash2) that are introduced by compilers during code optimization.
Compilers often optimize division operations by transforming them into much faster multiplication operations.
```

The KyberSlash attacks use the fact that the division by the Kyber-constant KYBER_Q uses the C-language division operator.
This division is compiled into an instruction that is not constant-time and is used to recover the secret key.
This attack is mitigated in Botan version 3.3 and is done by manually changing the critical division into multiple, smaller operations that are constant-time.

> The new set of operations is constructed in such a way, that a compiler will not create code that has variable execution time.

Author: ```suggestion
The new set of operations is constructed so that a compiler will not create code with variable execution time.
```

In general FrodoKEM is designed to be easy to implement and yields implementations that are compact and execute in constant time.

Nevertheless, one has to be careful while implementing FrodoKEM.
Guo et al. [GJN20] demonstrated a key-recovery timing attack targeting FrodoKEM's implementation of the Fujisaki-Okamoto transformation in the Round 2 submission to the NIST PQC competition.
Their attack exploits timing variations in the rejection sampling step of the KEM decapsulation process.
The attack can be mitigated by implementing comparisons in the decapsulation that run in constant time and do not terminate early.
The Round 3 submission of FrodoKEM mitigates this attack.

Dilithium (ML-DSA)
-------------------

Dilithium [BDK+20] is a digital signature scheme based on the module learning-with-errors (MLWE problem) problem and the module short integer solution (MSIS problem) problem.
Dilithium is designed to be executed in constant time.
The specification states that polynomial multiplications, rounding, and other critical operations are "easily implemented in constant time" to prevent timing side-channels.

> This includes for example the use of the C-language "\%" operator.

Author: ```suggestion
This includes, for example, the use of the C-language "\%" operator.
```

Instead, Dilithium uses Montgomery reductions that are constant time.
Additionally, in order to avoid side-channel attacks from the generation of randomness, Dilithium uses only uniform sampling instead of Gaussian sampling.
Dilithium is now standardized as NIST FIPS 204 [Nat24a].

An overview of side-channel attacks on Dilithium and Kyber based on power and electromagnetic radiation can be found in [RCD+24].

Sphincs+ (SHL-DSA)
------------------

Sphincs+ [ABB+20] is a stateless hash-based digital signature scheme.
The security of Sphincs+ is based on the properties of the used hash function.
Sphincs+ is based on the stateful hash signature scheme eXtended Merkle Signature Scheme (XMSS) [HBG+18], but works with larger keys and signatures to eliminate the state.
Additionally, a few-time signature scheme, forest of random subsets (FORS), is used.
The resistance of Sphincs+ (and other hash-based signature schemes such as XMSS and LMS) against time- and cache-based SCA is mainly based on the underlying used hash function.
The submitted reference-implementations of Sphincs+ are naturally free of secret-dependent branching or cache-accesses.

> One must be careful to use side-channel resistant hash functions:

Author: ```suggestion
One must be careful when using side-channel resistant hash functions:
```
